[docs] Introduce tutorial on writing reftests (#17811)
web-platform-tests/wpt: docs/writing-tests/reftest-tutorial.md

# Writing a reftest

Let's say you've discovered that WPT doesn't have any tests for the `dir`
attribute of [the `<bdo>`
element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/bdo). This
tutorial will guide you through the process of writing and submitting a test.
You'll need to [configure your system to use WPT's
tools](../running-tests/from-local-system), but you won't need them until
towards the end of this tutorial. Although it includes some very brief
instructions on using git, you can find more guidance in [the tutorial for git
and GitHub](../appendix/github-intro).

> WPT's reftests are great for testing web platform features that have some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WPT's reftests are great for testing web-platform features that have some
```

  because it makes tests more concise.

- ```html
  <title>BDO element dir=rtl</title>
  ```
  The document's title should succinctly describe the feature under test.

- ```html
  <link rel="author" title="Sam Smith" href="mailto:sam@example.com">
  ```

  You should replace the value of the `title` and `href` attributes with your
  name and e-mail, respectively. This can help others learn who to contact with
  questions about this test. The git history will do the
  same thing, so you can leave this out if you prefer.

- ```html
  <link rel="help" href="https://html.spec.whatwg.org/#the-bdo-element">
  ```

  The "help" metadata should reference the specification under test so that
  everyone understands the motivation. This is so helpful that [the CSS Working
  Group requires it for CSS tests](css-metadata)! If you're writing a reftest
  for a feature outside of CSS, feel free to omit this tag.

- ```html
  <meta name="assert" content="BDO element's DIR content attribute renders corrently given value of 'rtl'.">
  ```

  The "assert" metadata is a structured way for you to describe exactly what
  you want your reftest to verify. For a direct test like the one we're writing

>   here, it might seem a liitle superfluous. It's much more helpful for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  here, it might seem a little superfluous. It's much more helpful for
```

Author: Now you've gone too far. Spelling mistakes give writing personality!

Reviewer: haha — I wasn’t sure if you were actually misspelled *leetle* but I took a shot in the dark and guessed it might be *little* instead

>   here, it might seem a liitle superfluous. It's much more helpful for more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  here, it might seem a liitle superfluous. It's much more helpful for more-
```

  recommend using it for your first few tests since it may let reviewers give
  you more helpful feedback. As you get more familiar with WPT and the
  specifications, you'll get a sense for when and where it's better to leave it
  out.

- ```html
  <p>Test passes if WAS is displayed below.</p>
  ```

  We're communicating the "pass" condition in plain English to make the test
  self-describing.

- ```html
  <bdo dir="rtl">SAW</bdo>
  ```

  This is the real focus of the test. We're including some text inside a
  `<bdo>` element in order to demonstrate the feature under test.

Since this page doesn't rely on any [special WPT server
features](server-features), we can view it by loading the HTML file directly.
There are a bunch of ways to do this; one is to navigate to the
`html/semantics/text-level-semantics/the-bdo-element/` directory in a file
browser and drag the new `rtl.html` file into an open web browser window.

![](/assets/reftest-tutorial-test-screenshot.png "screen shot of the new test")

Sighted people can open that document and verify whether or not the stated
expectation is satisfied. If we were writing a [manual test](manual), we'd be

> done. However, it's time consuming for a human to run tests, so we should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
done. However, it's time-consuming for a human to run tests, so we should
```

us catch other kinds of mistakes.

The tools support running the tests in many different browsers. We'll use
Firefox this time:

    python ./wpt run firefox html/semantics/text-level-semantics/the-bdo-element/rtl.html

We expect this test to pass, so if it does, we're ready to submit it. If we
were testing a web platform feature that Firefox didn't support, we would
expect the test to fail instead.

There are a few problems to look out for in addition to passing/failing status.
The report will describe fewer tests than we expect if the isn't run at all.
That's usually a sign of a formatting mistake, so you'll want to make sure
you've used the right file names and metadata. Separately, the web browser
might crash. That's often a sign of a browser bug, so you should consider
reporting it to the browser's maintainers!

## Submitting the test

First, let's stage the new files for committing:

    $ git add html/semantics/text-level-semantics/the-bdo-element/rtl.html
    $ git add html/semantics/text-level-semantics/the-bdo-element/rtl-ref.html

We can make sure the commit has everything we want to submit (and nothing we

> don't) using `git diff`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don't), using `git diff`:
```

Author: This matches the way I would enunciate the sentence, but I don't see how it's grammatically necessary. If the parenthetical weren't there, then the comma would feel more out of place.

Though scrutinizing the sentence along those lines makes me think that the word "by" is necessary here.

Reviewer: Actually to me, if it had *“We can make sure the commit has everything we want to submit using `git diff`”*, it’s even more ambiguous: Does it mean there is some set of things you want to use `git diff` to submit? Or does it instead mean, *Using `git diff`, we can make sure the commit has everything we want to submit.*? Of course it means the latter, but without the comma — or without moving the *Using `git diff`* to the beginning of the sentence instead of the end — it’s ambiguous. But I don’t feel strongly about it needing to be changed. I defer to your judgment on  whether you think it’s fine as-is. Like a lot of copy edits, it’s just a judgment call.

# Writing a reftest

<!--
Note to maintainers:

This tutorial is designed to be an authentic depiction of the WPT contribution
experience. It is not intended to be comprehensive; its scope is intentionally
limited in order to demonstrate authoring a complete test without overwhelming

> the reader with features. This should be updated as typical WPT usage patterns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the reader with features. Because typical WPT usage patterns change over time,
```

> change, but please weigh extensions against the demotivating effect that a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this should be updated periodically; but please weigh extensions against the demotivating effect that a
```

    $ git fetch git@github.com:web-platform-tests/wpt.git

Next, we need a place to store the change set we're about to author. Here's how
to create a new git branch named `reftest-for-bdo` from the revision of WPT we
just downloaded:

    $ git checkout -b reftest-for-bdo FETCH_HEAD

Now you're ready to create your patch.

## Writing the test file

First, we'll create a file that demonstrates the "feature under test." That is:
we'll write an HTML document that displays some text using a `<bdo>` element.

WPT has thousands of tests, so it can be daunting to decide where to put a new
one. Generally speaking, [test files should be placed in directories
corresponding to the specification text they are
verifying](../test-suite-design). `<bdo>` is defined in [the "text-level
semantics" chapter of the HTML
specification](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/text-level-semantics.html),
so we'll want to create our new test in the directory
`html/semantics/text-level-semantics/the-bdo-element/`. Create a file named
`rtl.html` and open it in your text editor.

Here's one way to demonstrate the feature:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<title>BDO element dir=rtl</title>

> <link rel="author" title="Sam Smith" href="mailto:sam@example.com">

Reviewer 2: Let's drop this link; there's no real need for it.

Author: Non-essential metadata is gratuitous for this guide. Good call
